Dictation in the 11th grade
  Updated: July 10, 2018
Hat with wildflowers

In the 11th grade, students are aimed at a unified state exam, solve tests. It would seem that why do they need dictation?

It is recommended to carry out diagnostic work at the beginning of the year, 3-4 control dictation can be carried out throughout the year. All the proposed dictation is different, there are texts with tasks. But this option is used at the request of the teacher.

 
11th grade
Diagnostic dictation
There is no end to the world…
It's the end of September now, but the branches haven't turned yellow yet. But from behind the houses, from the backyards, the tops of yellow and crimson-red trees can be seen.

The grass that overgrown the whole village, too, like the branches, would have been completely green if the old lime trees growing in the fence had not begun to drop yellowed foliage. And since there was a strong wind yesterday, there were enough leaves to cover the whole village, and now the greenery of the grass is already visible through the fallen leaves. A narrow driveway glitters brightly among the yellow-green.

There is some strange combination of naive blue and dark, asp clouds in the sky. At times, the clear sun peeks through, and then the clouds become even blacker, the clear areas of the sky are even bluer, the foliage is even yellower, the grass is even greener. And in the distance, an old bell tower peeks through the half-fallen lime trees.

If from this bell tower, climbing up the half-rotted beams and ladders, now look in all directions of the white light, then your horizons will immediately expand. We will take in the whole hill on which the village stands, we will see, perhaps, a river winding around the foot of the hill, villages standing along the river, a forest, a horseshoe covering the entire landscape.

Imagination can lift us higher than the bell tower, then the horizons will expand again, and the village that was just around us will seem to consist of toy houses merged into a small flock in the middle of the earth, which has a noticeable planetary curvature.

We will see that the earth is entwined with many paths and roads. Those that are brighter, fatter, lead to the cities that can now be seen from our height. (According to V. Soloukhin.)

(245 words.)

Storm
Clouds appeared over the mountains – at first light and airy, then gray, with ragged edges. And the sea immediately changed colors – it began to darken.

Clinging to the wooded peaks of the mountains, the clouds sank lower and lower, captured gorges and hollows, turned into heavy, impenetrable clouds. Only the mountains seemed to be holding them back now, but the mountains couldn't do anything either: a blue veil was creeping from the mountains to the sea.

The clouds were coming from the mountains, sinking lower and lower, towards the sea. They, as if reluctantly, covered the water with a haze – from the shore and beyond. They were crawling not only along the slopes where the houses of the upper streets were sheltered, but also covered the lower main street with fog. The drivers turned on their headlights and increasingly gave signals. And the trains were running now, buzzing nervously, with lighted lanterns.

The sea was darkening from the shore. Quiet, seemingly hidden, with a smooth surface and barely audible surf, it went from white to black spots, then incomprehensible streaks, as if another water had been thrown into it from the air.

The wait lasted an hour. Thunder struck in the mountains, and torrents of rain poured down, and the sea raged. It flooded the shore, beat against the concrete embankment, against stairs and blocks of rocks, it rattled and shuddered, groaned and admired, cried and roared.

The sky above the sea turned neither gray nor black, but somehow unnaturally brown. Lightning cut the sky from the left, then from the right, then in front, then behind, then somewhere above the shore. The sea swallowed them up, swallowed them along with the brown sky and the thunderclaps.

(232 words.)

For mushrooms
Early Saturday morning, barely perceptible behind the gray veil of a wide, calm rain, I went to the forest to pick mushrooms. There was also a comrade, a young officer, the son-in-law of the hostess of a neighboring cottage, who called me either Volodya or Sasha, although my name is not like that, and not like that. His name was Valera. He provided me with a long officer's raincoat, he also covered himself with the same cape, only with a hood, and put on rubber fishing boots.    

It was raining, as it had been yesterday, the small Kashirka river that skirted the village overflowed, and when we came to the ford, it turned out to be impossible for me to cross without pouring boots. Then the companion kindly put up his curls, which I took advantage of not without secret joy: in the army I was just a soldier, and I could not even dream that I would ever be able to ride on an officer's back. After crossing the river, we climbed up the wet steep slope of the slide and found ourselves in a birch woodland.

Narrow paths cut by cattle wound through the trees, weaving and unraveling - the village herd is usually driven through this forest. The long grass manes between the paths glistened, thickly showered with raindrops, yellow boulders stuck out in the grass, juicy and slimy. There were so many boulders that it even became somehow unpleasant: quite harmless mushrooms, which even salted, now caused some kind of squeamish feeling. There were also a lot of raw teeth – gray, pink, thick crimson.

I was having fun: I already knew, I had a premonition that I would have mushrooms today. (235 words.)

Spring evening
The street, swept clean and still damp from the recently melted snow, was deserted, but beautiful with a slightly heavy beauty. Large white houses with stucco decorations on the cornices and in the walls between the windows, painted in a subtle pinkish shade by the spring rays of the setting sun, looked at the light of God with concentration and importance. The melting snow had washed the dust off them, and they stood almost close to each other, so clean, fresh, and well-fed. And the sky shone above them just as solidly, light and pretty.

Pavel walked and, feeling in complete harmony with his surroundings, idly thought about how well you can live if you don't demand a lot from life, and how arrogant and stupid those people are who, having pennies, demand rubles from life.

Thinking so, he did not notice how he went out onto the embankment of the street. There was a whole sea of water below him, glistening coldly in the rays of the sun, which was slowly sinking into it far on the horizon. The river, as well as the sky reflected in it, was solemnly calm. Neither waves nor a frequent network of ripples could be seen on its polished cold surface. With a wide swing, she fell asleep calmly, as if tired of this swing. And on it, the purple-gold velvet band of sunset rays languidly melted. Far away, already shrouded in the blue haze of evening, a narrow ribbon of land could be seen separating the water from the sky, cloudless and deserted, like the river covered by it. It would be nice to float like a free bird between them, powerfully dissecting the blue fresh air with its wing! (223 words.)


Fire
No one knows exactly when man first mastered fire. Maybe lightning ignited a tree near his primitive home? Or did the hot lava spewed by a volcano at the dawn of mankind lead our ancient ancestors to the first thought of fire?

But fire has long been needed by man. And it is not for nothing that one of the most beautiful and proud legends of antiquity is dedicated to the one who discovered for man the secret of fire, protected by the gods. He was, as the legend says, a fearless and independent Prometheus. He himself came from a family of celestial gods, but, contrary to their strict prohibition, he brought fire to the inhabitants of the earth — people. The angry gods cast Prometheus to the ground and condemned him to eternal torment.

Since time immemorial, fire has become a constant sure sign of man. A traveler caught on the road at night, seeing a fire in the distance, surely knew: there are people there!

A person needed fire for light, for strength: it illuminated and heated the house, helped to cook food. And then man learned to use its heat to extract from the water the mighty steam that moves cars.

Fire has long been considered an inviting sign of cordiality and friendship. The fire scared the beast away from human habitation, but called man to man. And people still say when they invite you to visit: "Come in for a light!"

But, like many other benefits that man has obtained for himself by taking from nature, a good fire has become evil and trouble for many. The fire was taken over by greedy, predatory people who forced others to give them all their strength. The fire gave rise to weapons, which became known as firearms. (According to L. Cassil.)

(228 words.)

Control dictation based on the results of the 1st half of the year
Raising a child
To continue yourself in your child is a great happiness. You will look at your child as the only miracle in the world. You will be ready to give anything to make your son feel good. But don't forget that he must be a human being first of all. And the most important thing in a person is a sense of duty to those who do you good. For the good that you will give to the child, he will experience a feeling of gratitude, gratitude only when he himself will do good for you – father, mother, in general for people of older generations.